# CNC-MCT-Anomaly-Detection
Deep learning-based anomaly detection using 1D CNN in MCT and CNC machines.
Computer numerical control (CNC) and machine center (MCT) machines are mechanical devices that manipulate different tools using computer programming as inputs. Predicting failures in CNC and MCT machines before their actual failure time is crucial to reduce maintenance costs and increase productivity. This study is centered around a novel deep learning-based model using a 1D convolutional neural network (CNN) for early fault detection in MCT machines. We collected sensor-based data from CNC/MCT machines and applied various preprocessing techniques to prepare the dataset. Our experimental results demonstrate that the 1D-CNN model achieves a higher accuracy of 91.57% compared to traditional machine learning classifiers and other deep learning models, including Random Forest (RF) at 89.71%, multi-layer perceptron (MLP) at 87.45%, XGBoost at 89.67%, logistic regression (LR) at 75.93%, support vector machine (SVM) at 75.96%, K-nearest neighbors (KNN) at 82.93%, decision tree at 88.36%, naïve Bayes at 68.31%, long short-term memory (LSTM) at 90.80%, and a hybrid 1D CNN + LSTM model at 88.51%. Moreover, our proposed 1D CNN model outperformed all other mentioned models in precision, recall, and F-1 scores, with 91.87%, 91.57%, and 91.63%, respectively. These findings highlight the efficacy of the 1D CNN model in providing optimal performance with an MCT machine’s dataset, making it particularly suitable for small manufacturing companies seeking to automate early fault detection and classification in CNC and MCT machines. This approach enhances productivity and aids in proactive maintenance and safety measures, demonstrating its potential to revolutionize the manufacturing industry.

This is Private data, we can not provide the full data, partially I have given it with exercise coding. For more, you can read our Article -  https://peerj.com/articles/cs-2389/
